# Avoiding Spectacle

> It's okay to be bored.

In this week's article, we consider that investing does not need to be entertaining.

---

## All the World's a Stage

Jordan Peele's 2022 movie Nope is about an alien that consumes people who can't look away from it. Spectacle, and how we respond to it, is a strong theme in the film. Hollywood itself is alluded to as something both appealing and potentially disastrous. Indeed, all that glitters is not gold!

In markets, participants are often wooed by entertaining people, hot takes, and extreme movements in price. Unfortunately, those people usually have ulterior motives, those hot takes typically have no evidence for their claims, and those wild moves have already happened by the time you see them.

Just like financial capital, we have to be careful in how we allocate our mental capital in the landscape of information.

## Attention Deficits

It's unsurprising how short of a memory the market has anymore.

One month, Gamestop is the big story. Or is the big story actually copper? The month before that, it was gold. Cocoa was going nuts too, remember that? Oh, but don't forget about Bitcoin ETFs! The Reddit IPO and Super Micro Computer and Retardio coin, pay attention! You don't want to miss out, do you?

Want to know the nasty secret? You will miss out. The kicker? That's okay.

Whatever you read on Twitter or ZeroHedge or Bloomberg is supposed to modify your behavior. Make you feel like you're a genius, or maybe an idiot, because you randomly stumbled upon some bit of information. Make you feel awful so you sell the bottom and wonderful so you buy the top.

But you have to stay informed somehow, don't you? Well, yes, but not like that.

Want to know what price is doing? Look at the chart, don't read a computer-generated article. Want to know how healthy the company is? Read the 10-K, don't listen to a maligned analyst.

This isn't to say that no one has anything important to say. However, try to gauge their opinions from the most impartial settings and recognize their biases over time. Peter Schiff wants you to buy gold, Michael Saylor wants you to buy Bitcoin, and Jensen Huang wants you to buy Nvidia. If you can remember that you are usually being sold to, then keeping your wits about you is much easier.

## Your Process is Your Process

If you keep at anything long enough, you begin to develop an intuition.

I value intuition over many other qualities. Smarts are helpful for being able to reduce a problem to its fundamental parts, but smarts can get you in trouble if you overengineer in the pursuit of feeling clever. Socialization is wonderful when you can tap into a network to get a pulse on the social activity of a scene, but socialization can also lead to groupthink and groupthink is deadly in finance. Contrarianism can also be deadly when misapplied, make no mistake. But intuition is simultaneously all of these qualities and none of them.

There are little hints. If you look at myriad charts, study the moods of bubbles and panics, and keep a consistent watchlist to monitor at least the daily close values, you will start to feel their changes. This is your process. These are your opinions.

You won't need somebody to tell you how to think about a company, your process will tell you that.

## Closing

> Neo: What are you trying to tell me? That I can dodge bullets?
> Morpheus: No, Neo. I'm trying to tell you that when you're ready, you won't have to.
> The Matrix (1999)
