# Calling the Top (pt. 2)

> Quantity over quality?

In this week's article, we try to evaluate the market.

---

## Price Is What You Pay

> I can't time stocks. I don't know anybody else who can either.
>
> - Warren Buffett

Today, we will look at spreads that relate the price of the market to alternative assets, series that support financial markets, and macroeconomic indicators. In general, we want to ask the question "is the market expensive?" With a little diligence, we can arrive at an answer supported by the best evidence.

If you would like to learn about or refresh yourself on some of the details of the methods I use in this article, I recommend checking out the previous articles [Twin Expectations](https://dilettantecapital.com/p/twin-expectations) and [Five Reasons to Be Cautious](https://dilettantecapital.com/p/five-reasons-to-be-cautious).

## The Buffett Indicator

The Buffett Indicator is simple. We take the current value of the stock market and place it over the current value of GDP. Here, we use an analog of the current value of American equities: the product of the S&P 500 cash index (SPX) and its mean ratio to the value of total equity assets.

...

The Buffett Indicator (log-scaled) with its cumulative mean in blue and a regression output across time in red.

As we can see, the Buffett Indicator is as extended as it has ever been, nominally. While our analog claims that the value of the stock market is about 1.6 times the value of GDP, the more accurate number is 1.8, not too far off.

Relative to our trends, the current level remains extended. Compared to the regression output, we are +88% over the predicted value. Compared to the cumulative mean, we are +139% over expectations. It appears that only 2021 and the Dotcom bubble saw dearer valuations within this context.

The Buffett Indicator is at the very least telling us to be cautious here, if not downright pessimistic about future returns. This is only one perspective, however. Fortunately, there are many ways to skin a cat.

## Compensation of Employees

Bob Elliott once worked for Ray Dalio's Bridgewater. Now, he is a popular voice within "FinTwit." Being a notorious holdout for not calling a recession in the macroeconomic space, his main argument is that our current cycle is primarily driven by income and not credit. Since income growth has been strong, he argues, then the contractions in credit and rising delinquencies on short-term loans are not much worry about.

Let us try addressing this argument from a different angle. How well does total employee compensation support the current price of the market?

...

Spread between the SPX and compensation of employees (log-scaled) with cumulative mean in blue and regression in red.

## Financial Assets

...

Spread between the SPX and total financial assets (log-scaled) with cumulative mean in blue and regression in red.

## Consumer Loans

...

Spread between the SPX and total consumer loans with commercial banks (log-scaled) with cumulative mean in blue and regression in red.

## Money Supply

...

Spread between the SPX and M3 for the U.S. (log-scaled) with cumulative mean in blue and regression in red.
