# A Little Difference

> Maintaining momentum.

In this week's article, we improve upon the momentum indicator.

---

<!-- ## Preamble

Being particular is good in finance - especially in technical analysis. Unfortunately, math is not intuitive for many people, so even well-known indicators or practices end up with mediocre results.

In this article, we'll be tearing apart the popular momentum indicator and the practice of normalizing values to a standard normal distribution. As we'll find out, neither the aforementioned indicator or practice are something you should do in your analysis.

To put it another way, we can do better. -->

## Momentum

A common technical indicator is momentum, which is really just a lagged difference. Typically, it's the difference from one price (at some time) to another (at another time) in a stock's history. For example, most momentum indicators are parameterized with a whole number length, referring to how many trading days we should lag backwards from any given point.

Say we have a length of 252, which is how many trading days there are in a year. If today's close was $100 and the close 252 trading days ago was $90, then our momentum would read +10 for the current day.

Here's what that looks like in practice for Apple (AAPL):

...

Daily line chart of AAPL (top, log-scaled) with a momentum indicator (bottom).

Notice that as time progresses, and the price of AAPL rises, the width of range for our momentum indicator is widening. This is the first mistake of the indicator, it doesn't take into account the scale at which the change between prices is taking place. After all, whether we go from $10 to $11 or $100 to $110, we would still be looking at a 10% gain, right?

Let's fix that.

## Per Centum

The first adjustment to our momentum indicator is using a percent change instead of a difference. A percentage change is the difference between an new and old value, divided by the old value, and then multiplied by 100.

What does that look like on our chart?

...

Daily line chart of AAPL (top, log-scaled) with a percentage change indicator (bottom).

Much better, but let's think about this.

A negative change is bounded between -100% and 0%. A positive change is bounded from 0%, but unbounded up to infinity. For this reason, you might have noticed that the positive peaks stretch further than the negative troughs do. Another way to think about this is that a -50% drawdown could be eliminated with a +200% gain, but the absolute values of those changes are not the same.

What might correct this?

## Changing Logarithmically

We've learned about log change before but it's been a while. Let's refresh.

Log change is actually quite simple. We start by taking the quotient between a new and old value, we then take the logarithm of that ratio, and finally multiply it by 100. Technically, these are called centinepers (cNp). If we use a log function with a base of 10 instead of the natural logarithm and scale it by 10 instead of 100, we have decibels (dB)!

Log changes are wonderful because they are symmetrical. For example, -50% becomes -69.31 cNp (-3.01 dB) and +200% becomes +69.31 cNp (+3.01 dB).

Once again, we'll update our chart:

...

Daily line chart of AAPL (top, log-scaled) with a log change indicator (bottom).

Excellent. That tweak dealt with all the weird stretching issues. It's okay to monkey with indicators based on the "look and feel" sometimes. If your spatial intuition is strong, what looks "better" is usually closer to what is "correct."

Believe it or not, we can do even better. When we are trading, what has happened recently is more important than what happened in the past. After all, we have to trade the current price, not the price from last month! With a simple lagged window, we are essentially taking the mean of the daily changes between now and some time in the past.

We don't want to consider the daily change from a year ago as important as the one that happened yesterday, so what do we do?

## Moving Exponentially

Exponential moving functions are simply beautiful. For fear of this post getting *too* heady, we can save their mechanics for another day.

With a little bit of fairy dust, we can get an exponentially-weighted log change momentum indicator up and running:

...

Daily line chart of AAPL (top, log-scaled) with an exponential log change indicator (bottom).
