# AUM Spreads

> How to avoid the crowd.

In today's article, we discuss an indicator that allows us to investigate ETF positioning.

---

## Exchange-Traded Fund (ETF)

An Exchange-Traded Fund (ETF) is a type of pooled investment security that trades similar to a stock. You can think of it akin to a mutual fund. Many ETFs are thematic or specific to some market component. The first ETF was the SPY, which tracks the S&P 500 index and remains the most popular. ETFs have management fees attached, so it is wise to minimize the fees when comparing similar ETFs. For instance, the IVV and VOO also track the S&P 500 index but with lower fees.

...

Weekly candle chart of the SPY (log-scaled).

A good place to find ETFs is the [ETF Database](https://etfdb.com/).

## Assets Under Management (AUM)

The best way to judge the size of an ETF is by looking at the assets under management (AUM). When money flows into an ETF, it starts to appreciate in value if the net asset value (NAV) increases. This concept is akin to investing $10 in a stock, seeing its price increase, and now your initial $10 investment is valued at, say, $15. A $10 flow appreciated to $15 AUM due to a NAV return of +50%.

...

Daily line chart of the AUM value of the SPY (log-scaled).

Why is AUM worth looking at? While analyzing AUM on a single ETF has its limitations, it becomes much more insightful when we incorporate multiple ETFs.

## Speculation Seesaw

If you enjoy speculative investments, there are a pair of ETFs you may find interesting. The TQQQ is the 3x bullish QQQ fund, and the SQQQ is the 3x bearish QQQ fund. Both of these ETFs have high fees due to their leverage, making them unsuitable for long-term holds.

...

Daily line chart of the QQQ (top, log scale) and the ratio between the AUM of TQQQ and the AUM of the SQQQ (bottom, log-scaled).

When we calculate the ratio between the bullish AUM and the bearish AUM, we obtain something akin to a positioning indicator.

Let us examine the past three years as an example. From the end of 2021 to October 2022, the QQQ declined by approximately -33%. In the same period, our ratio shifted from 17.4 to 1.9. This means that in December 2021, there was 17.4 times more money in the TQQQ than the SQQQ, but by October 2022, this ratio had decreased significantly to 1.9. This represents a substantial swing in the ratio. From October 2022 to today, the QQQ has risen by about +55%, and our AUM ratio has settled at a stable yet elevated level of 6.7.

## Market Safari

> If all you have is a hammer, everything looks like a nail.

In our final section, let us explore a variety of AUM spreads!

The first chart illustrates the concentrated nature of our market, focusing on the the SPY/QQQ pair. Note the correlation between the price chart and the AUM spread of this pair.

...

Daily line chart of the SPY/QQQ (top, log scale) and the AUM ratio of the SPY/QQQ (bottom, log-scaled).

The SPY has underperformed the QQQ as the U.S. equity market has become increasingly concentrated in specific stocks. If there is a significant concentration of money in certain parts of the market, it may be worth considering an equal-weighted index instead. Next, let's consider an alternative asset: SPY/GLD (gold fund).

...

Daily line chart of the SPY/GLD (top, log scale) and the AUM ratio of the SPY/GLD (bottom, log-scaled).

The last time the AUM ratio of SPY/GLD was this elevated (indicating a relative crowding into equities), equities underperformed gold over the following two years. We see a similar crowding in equities versus the U.S. dollar, represented by the SPY/UUP.

...

Daily line chart of the SPY/UUP (top, log scale) and the AUM ratio of the SPY/UUP (bottom, log-scaled).

This time, the shift in money did not have a significant effect on the performance difference between the two assets. However, from a tactical perspective, one could have taken advantage of the COVID dip better by being in the dollar. Overall, after the positioning shifted, these two assets performed equally. Finally, to clarify that this analysis is not a magic bullet, let's look at a scenario where being a contrarian would have been quite painful.

...

Daily line chart of the SPY/USO (top, log scale) and the AUM ratio of the SPY/USO (bottom, log-scaled).

The last time the relative AUM ratio favored equities over an oil fund, equities actually outperformed the oil fund by over 300% by the time the positioning had reset! Investing in USO over the SPY using this technique would have been a detrimental move.

## Conclusions

Incorporating AUM into our market analysis provides additional insights into where money is flowing and where potential opportunities may arise in the future. While not a perfect indicator of positioning or sentiment, it can be a powerful tool when used thoughtfully and with a large dataset (consider summing multiple ETF AUM values for similar themes).

Currently, the majority of capital is focused on mega-cap U.S. equities. Due to this heightened capital focus, there are numerous overlooked investment opportunities both domestically and internationally.
