# What Investing Is

> A game of this for that.

This post marks the beginning of a series of weekly educational articles. These articles can range from being general advice to specific technical knowledge. I hope you find them useful.

## Investing is Security

Why invest at all? After the wave of inflation we just experienced, the answer should be clear.

The Federal Reserve has a long-run inflation target of 2%. This means that if you were to save your money in the bank, every 35 years it would be worth half of what it had been originally. This rate is a target but what is the reality? From 1944 to the present, the Bureau of Labor Statistics reported an average inflation rate of 3.71%. This means that the purchasing power of your money is cut in half every 19 years. Some analysts like John Williams claim that inflation rates underestimate the true rates by a factor of two. If we assume this is true, then we have an inflation rate of 5.04% since 2002. In this case, the value of your money is cut in half every 14 years. Whether it takes 35 years or 14 years for your money to lose half of its value, you should care about your buying power.

One way to think about investing is as a game of this for that. Let us say you want to buy a medium-sized cup of black coffee from Starbucks. This would cost you $1.55 in 2001 and $2.45 in 2020. Notice that the simple act of buying coffee can be thought of as a pair trade. I receive one cup of coffee if I provide two and a half dollars. If we invert the trade, we can better understand the pair. A dollar cost 0.645 cups of coffee in 2001 and 0.408 cups of coffee in 2020. To put it another way, the value of coffee has outperformed the value of the dollar by +58% in this period.

What does this have to do with investing? Instead of storing our wealth in dollars, we can instead own something that is more desirable in the future. Take the S&P 500 index as an example. This index measures fluctuations in the summed market capitalization of the largest US companies. You could purchase one contract of the S&P 500 cash index for $1158.76 in 2001 and $3236.05 in 2020. Let us now invert the pair trade. A thousand dollars cost 0.863 contracts in 2001 and 0.309 contracts in 2020. The value of the S&P 500 market index outperformed the value of a dollar by +179% during this period.

Notice that by being invested in the market from 2001 to 2020, we could have had 2.79x more dollars than if we simply saved them. With an inflation rate of 3.71%, the purchasing power of the dollar would be halved over the same period, so we can equate this to a 1.4x increase in general purchasing power by being invested. Lastly, our Starbuck’s example indicates a 1.77x increase in the number of cups of coffee because of the investment.

We took a look at four "assets", if we can call them that, in the above examples. The dollar, a cup of coffee, the S&P 500 cash contract, and a general measure buying power. We cannot outright own a buying power index, so it is not strictly an asset. All the other stuff, we can actually own. If you could go back to the year 2001, which of the four would you choose to hold over the next 19 years? If you chose the S&P 500, you are thinking like an investor!

In a pool of assets, investors want to hold the one which will outperform all the others in the future. The trick is knowing which asset that is and when to hold it.

## Investing is Trading

For all that has been said about traders versus investors, they are both market participants. Both traders and investors buy and sell assets in a market, the difference is how active they are. Traders are very active and investors are seldom active. However, there are important considerations of activity level in relation to skill.

Lower skilled market participants should trade less. It is true that “a fool and his money are soon parted.”

> A fool and his money are soon parted.

## Investing is Opportunistic

If there was a +50% move in some asset and you missed it, that potential is now gone forever. You cannot unexplode a bomb. This what Howard Marks calls the risk of missed opportunity.

You are living, you are dying. This is the most important reason why anything has value: we do not live forever. Because we do not live forever, people want to do things with their life before it ends. The things we want to do often require goods and services that have some amount of scarcity. There are only so many coffee beans you can harvest in a year because the workers have finite lives, there is only so much land on Earth, there is only so much rainfall in a year, etc. Your life's time is scarce, just like any other resource.

- Time
- You are dying

## Investing is Competitive

- Market
- Hucksters

## Investing is a Lifestyle

- Mindset

## Your Goals as an Investor

1. Do not lose money
1. Make more money
