# Properties of Growth

> Investing is relative.

## Why Does this Chart Look the Way it Does?

If you trade markets, you look at charts.

Popular financial websites like Yahoo Finance, MarketWatch, Google Finance, and FINVIZ typically offer at least a simple embedded chart to visualize movements in the share price of a stock. If we want advanced charting, we can use websites like TradingView and StockCharts. Of course, there are dozens of alternatives, too many to list here!

Without endorsing any company in particular, I do find myself using TradingView almost every day. Being able to load custom PineScript indicators on-demand is essential for my style of tinkering. Sometimes, for more complex analyses, I create charts from the ground up using the R language, but we can discuss that another time.

To begin, let us take a look at the S&P 500 cash index (SPX) using yearly candles.

[IMAGE GOES HERE]

These two charts above contain the same information, but we are looking at it from different perspectives. On the left, the scale has even spacings of 200, representing the dollar value of the SPX contract. We can call this the linear or absolute view. On the right, the scale is uneven when it comes to the dollar value, but it is even in a different respect! We can call this the logarithmic or relative view.

To further explain what it means to have a logarithmic view, turn your attention now to the pairs of green and pink "measuring sticks." The green bars both have a length of $1000, but their relative values differ. The pink bars both have a "length" of +200%, but their absolute values differ. Notice that on the left, the green bars are equal but the pink bars are not. Conversely, on the right, the pink bars are equal but the green bars are not.

Another way to think of the discrepancy is by using arithmetic. To get from the bottom to the top of the green bars, we have to add $1000 each time. To get from the bottom to the top of the pink bars, we have to multiply the bottom price by 3 (a ratio of 3x is equal to +200% relative change). So, on the left, we can shift around a "measuring stick" and the difference will always be constant. On the right, we can shift around a "measuring stick" and the ratio will always be constant.

Lastly, take note of the black and white yearly candles themselves. On which view is it easier to draw a straight line through the data? The logarithmic view!

We have discussed the difference between viewing financial data from a linear or a logarithmic perspective, but what does this mean for our investment decisions?

## Exponential Growth

Investing is predicated upon compounding returns over time.

If you have $100 today and expect to earn 5% from an investment annually, you would have $105 at the end of the year. Simple enough. The next year you get 5% again, but the result is $110.25 this time. Where did that extra quarter come from? Just like the example we investigated earlier, the relative change is equal from year to year, but the linear change is variable. How do we calculate returns over 40 years, a typical career? We can take our original $100 and multiply it by 1.05 (a ratio of 1.05x is equal to +5% relative change) raised to the 40th power.

$$\$100 \times 1.05^{40} \approx \$704$$

After 40 years, we can expect our original $100 investment to turn into $704. Remember that if we have an equal inflation rate within the same period, we are flat from a relative or "real" return perspective. At the very least, we *preserve* our wealth by investing.

## Math Time

We can use log math to find an alternative solution for the problem above. You can use any base for the log function so long as the base is the same for the inverse; I will be using Euler's number as a base (the natural logarithm). First, we take the log of 1.05 and multiply it by 40 (multiplication on the log scale is equivalent to exponentiation on the linear scale). Then, we take the inverse log of the product and multiply that by our original $100.

$$\$100 \times e ^ {40\ln1.05} \approx \$704$$

Seems a lot more complicated, why would we want to learn this? For starters, we can find doubling times really easily. How long would it take to double an investment at a 5% annual return? We can divide the log of 2 by the log of 1.05.

$$\ln2 \div \ln1.05 \approx 14.2$$

14 years to double our investment, that was easy.

What else can we do with log math? The most powerful lesson that I have learned when it comes to relative change is how to linearize return data.

## Bels and Nepers

Most people know what a decibel is (dB), but did you know the bel is a general unit that is not only used for measuring loudness? It is defined as ten times a base-10 logarithm and is named after Alexander Graham Bell. If we use natural logarithms, the units used are called nepers (also called log points) after John Napier who discovered logarithms! I use centinepers (cNp) for many of my indicators because of their useful qualities.

Below is a monthly line chart of AAPL from 1998 to 2007 with 12 month relative change indicators on the bottom (log scaled). The black indicator is the relative percentage change and the red indicator is log change. This is imperfect because they have different scale limits (relative change cannot be less than -100%), but it keeps the chart clean.

[IMAGE GOES HERE]

The first thing to notice is that the relative percentage change indicator deviates from zero more extremely than the log change indicator. This is because it is "easier" to have larger values than smaller ones. For example, if we have a year with -50% returns followed by +50% returns from a principal of $100, we would end up with $75. So a +200% gain balances a -50% loss.

When it comes to log change, a -50% loss is equal to -69.3 cNp and a +200% gain is equal to +69.3 cNp. Log changes ensure that the magnitudes of relative losses and gains are equal. This is important for analysis as it brings the return data much closer to a normal distribution (though the actual distribution is more complex). Another big plus is that instead of having to calculate a cumulative product of ratios to get back to non-transformed data, we can calculate a cumulative sum of log changes, which many programming languages handle well.

Before moving on, take a look at the green markings on the chart. On the top, we have two similarly-sized rectangles. One is measuring a -70% loss and the other measuring a +270% gain. Combined, these returns would result in an 11% overall gain, but they offset each other decently well. What is important is that our indicator is giving us equal-sized deviations that correspond to equal-sized relative movements on the logarithmic chart.

To avoid delving too deeply into details, let's shift our focus to an intriguing instance of exponential scaling in the market.

## A Strange Finding

Are some numbers special?

Not to flash my nerd card too brazenly, but I have been thinking about $\phi$ (the golden ratio) and $e$ (Euler's number) a lot recently. I will try my best to spare you and stay focused. Euler's number is in the market. Let me explain.

There are three levels of the SPX that are historic and related. The close of September 16, 1929, at $31.86, the intraday low of March 6, 2009, at $666.79, and the intraday high of January 4, 2022, at $4818.62. Historically these levels respectively denote the heights of the Roaring Twenties, the lows of the Great Recession, and the ceiling we've been flirting with for the past couple of years.

From the midpoint of $666.79, we can get to the two other levels using powers of Euler's number. As an approximation, you can use 2.71828 for $e$. First, we derive the 1929 high by dividing the 2009 low by $e$ three times.

$$\$666.79 \div e^3 = \$33.20 \approx \$31.86$$

Next, we derive the 2021 high by multiplying the 2009 low by $e$ twice.

$$\$666.79 \times e^2 = \$4926.95 \approx \$4818.62$$

As a graphical representation, here is a ladder of levels constructed from an anchor of $666.79 and ratio of a $e$.

[IMAGE GOES HERE]

Are these predictions precise? Certainly not. They carry relative errors of +4.5% and +2.5%. Nonetheless, given the scales involved and the simplicity of the method, the results are remarkable. Notice that plenty of other levels in the ladder are not ceilings or floors but can serve as pivots. Many people disregard levels because they cannot predict *exact* support and resistance, but they can still serve as important points of interaction.

## Wrapping Up

Markets can be measured similarly to natural systems. We use logarithms to transform exponentially growing price data to make the patterns of relative change clear to us. Some constants, like Euler's number, are embedded in logarithmic functions and can show us how points in the market relate to one another. Even though log math can be tricky, it is worth brushing up on for serious investors!

## Wikipedia Links

- [Compound interest](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Compound_interest)
- [Exponential growth](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Exponential_growth)
- [Logarithm](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Logarithm)
- [Relative change](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Relative_change)
- [Decibel](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Decibel)
- [Neper](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Neper)
- [Euler's number](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/E_(mathematical_constant))
