# Twin Expectations

> Two heads are better than one.

In this article, we consider two different perspectives regarding what should be a "normal" trend.

---

## Old Normal

Being raised in the school of Graham and Dodd, we might expect that a company's fundamentals "return to the mean," or that the level of revenue, income, and cash flow seen in the past will return in the future. A good way to measure an expectation based on history could be a cumulative average.

Let's calculate a cumulative average from Nike's (NKE) price-to-sales ratio, find the spread between the two, and use that to generate a price expectation.

...

Two-day line chart of the price of NKE (top, log-scaled) and NKE's P/S ratio with a cumulative average (bottom, log-scaled).

Remember, the spread between the actual P/S ratio and the cumulative average is what generates our price expectation seen in the top chart. This is also why the cumulative average is smoother than the expected price.

If we are accustomed to the historical revenue streams from NKE, then the current stock price of $94 looks expensive to us! We would consider paying $74 as a "fair-value" price. To make the point more nuanced, this expectation would be inaccurate if NKE were able to sustainably grow its margins, reflecting a better ability to generate income from revenue than in the past.

Regardless, we have set up our more conservative expectation. How else can we look at a "normal" trend?

## New Normal

Markets tend to build bubbles as participants are lured into a "new normal." This will always seem foolish after the bubble has burst, but there is a strange logic to a bubble as it is being built.

We could have a more liberal sense of valuation if we are able to constantly adjust our expectations to what we could expect of the future, not the past. A good way to measure an expectation into the future could be a regression model. Specifically, a log-linear regression model on the P/S ratio is used below.

...

Two-day line chart of the price of NKE (top, log-scaled) and NKE's P/S ratio with a cumulative regression model (bottom, log-scaled).

Trying to front-run emerging trends in a market where participants are willing to pay more and more for less and less revenue per share, we would be ecstatic at the current price of NKE! We would be willing to pay up to $156, which is considered "fair value" using a regression model.

As you can see, our price expectations between the past and future valuations disagree with one another. From 2009 to 2022, it appears the trend-following regression model has performed better at identifying pivots than our more risk-averse cumulative average model. However, since 2022, the fight between the two seems to be more balanced.

There are moments when either of these models shines. We want to be conservative in bear markets and liberal in bull markets. But what if we wanted to be a good old-fashioned fence-sitter, just in case?

## The Twins Cast a Vote

Simply put, we can take the average between the two techniques to arrive at a more moderate expectation.

...

Two-day line chart of the price of NKE (top, log-scaled) and NKE's P/S ratio with a blended predictor (bottom, log-scaled).

In the above chart, the green line is the average between the cumulative average and the prediction from our regression model. Notice that it most accurately serves as support for price out of the models we've seen. This model is telling us that NKE is not too far off from its "fair value" price of $107.

It's important to realize that even though there are 20 years of data in the above chart, it's not a lot of time in the grand scheme of things. Unfortunately, quality fundamental data is hard to find much past the year 2000 in any case, and very rare beyond 1995. Ideally, we could look back 100 years to see multiple large-scale cycles in the data, but that is not possible for these single-issue analyses.

We could, however, look at the value of the entire stock market (sort of like a price) and compare it to the GDP of the country (the spread between the two forms something like a P/S ratio). Let's check that out in the next section.

## Buffett Indicator

Before you think I came up with this, it was actually Warren Buffett. The Buffett Indicator takes the quotient between the value of the stock market over the GDP of the U.S. Let's see what it says for our current situation:

...

Three-month line chart of the value of household equity assets (top, log-scaled) and the same divided by GDP (bottom, log-scaled).

Given GDP, current equity values are about +95% over what we would expect from a moderate "fair value" assessment. For reference, only Dotcom had a dearer assessment, pre-GFC the level looked similar, and we've been grinding along this valuation since 2014. This is shockingly similar to the period between 1954 and 1968 where a "ceiling" on the market size expectation was maintained before eventually unwinding.

Some may argue that the unwind after 1968 was due to exogenous events. The U.S. was bankrupt from the Vietnam War, and so the tab went on credit (dollars). So long, gold standard! While those events unquestionably changed the course of history, perhaps all the market needed was *any* catalyst to unwind the consistently high valuations of the era.

And perhaps a digital currency will buy governments even more time from their current debt levels. So long, fiat?
