# February 2024

> Wolves at the gate?

...

---

## January in Review

The past month saw a continuation of the rally that got going back in November, although at a slowed pace. The S&P 500 pushed higher by +1.59%, Nasdaq Composite by +1.02%, and Dow Jones Industrial Average by +1.22%. The Russell 2000 was left out of the gains, declining by -3.93%. Elsewhere, the Japanese Nikkei 225 had a tremendous January with a +8.43% move, China just the opposite with the SSE Composite losing -6.27%, and finally the STOXX Europe 50 outpacing America with +2.20%.

The U.S. 10 year government bond rate remains mostly unchanged, the Federal Funds rate was held constant, and the U.S. Dollar index increased by +2.10%. The S&P 500 Volatility index increased from 13.22 to 14.35, indicating an uptick in expected movement for February.

The S&P Goldman Sachs Commodity Index (GSCI) moved higher by +3.62%,  influenced by WTI crude oil futures increasing +6.29%. Gold declined by -1.14% and silver declined by -3.59%. Finally, Bitcoin is signaling market disagreement with a 27.4% spread between January's high and low prices, but only realizing a modest +0.71% gain from its open.

## Equity Flows

The most active stocks likely will not surprise you: Nvidia (NVDA) had $597B in flows and increased in price by 23.52% and Tesla saw $439B change hands, but decreased by -26.58%. Advanced Micro Devices (AMD) gained +12.17%, Apple (AAPL) lost -4.90%, and Microsoft (MSFT) pushed higher by +5.74%.

Shocks to the system, besides Tesla, include Boeing (BA) moving down by -19.04%, Humana Inc. (HUM) down by -17.30%, and the others included in the heatmap below.

...

Heatmap of stocks with +/- 15% performance in January 2024, sorted by gross flows (TradingView).

Despite the headline index making new all time highs, the heatmap above shows many more stocks moving down by -15% than the stocks increasing by +15%. Something to keep in mind about the underlying health of this market.

## Fire Sale

If you have a strong stomach, this may be a wonderful opportunity.

Medical Properties Trust, Inc. (MPW) is a self-advised real estate investment trust (REIT) established in 2003, focused on the acquisition and development of net-leased healthcare facilities. Currently, they own 437 properties with ~43,000 beds among them. Their property portfolio includes rehabilitation hospitals, long-term acute care hospitals, ambulatory surgery centers, hospitals specializing in women and children's health, regional and community hospitals medical office buildings, and other single-discipline facilities.

Now onto the juicy details. MPW is down -87.15% from its early 2022 peak. Back during the Great Financial Crisis (GFC) this REIT had lost -83.47% from the peak. Below is a chart showing these drawdowns.

...

Stock price of Medical Properties Trust, Inc. (MPW).

They currently have negative earnings, which of course is not ideal. However, their price to sales ratio is lower now (1.35) than the 2009 lows (2.32). Additionally, their price to book is also lower now (0.22) than in the 2009 lows (0.42). The big question is their debt, a whopping $10.31 billion of it. Now, barring that their asset valuation holds steady, they have $19 billion in assets to cover that debt.

This is a high risk setup, but high risk can pay high rewards for the brave few who choose to jump into the flames.

## Warnings from the Dismal Science

There are five Federal Reserve branches that each report a manufacturing index: Dallas, Kansas, New York, Richmond, and Philadelphia. Without knowing which Fed is the "best" Fed, we can simply take their average, shown below.

...

Top: Mean manufacturing index. Bottom: S&P 500 in black and the cumulative sum of the mean manufacturing index in red.

The current reading for this mean index is -22.74. Barring the COVID-19 pandemic, the last time we saw a similar reading was September 2008. This index has been reading negative since April 2022. However, the market has rebounded since October 2022, ignoring this economic deterioration.

We must remain cautious.

I was inspired to examine the discrepancy between reported gross domestic income (GDI) and gross domestic production (GDP) after listening to a podcast featuring John Williams of ShadowStats. The chart below highlights moments where reported GDP was +1.14% above reported GDI.

...

S&P 500. Green vertical lines show moments where GDP was +1.14% higher than GDI.

It is important to keep in mind that basing investment decisions on one indicator is ill-advised. That being said, we have recently experienced two signals of GDP being unrealistically high compared to GDI. Using historical precedent, this has marked the local peaks in 2007, 2000, and 1981. To put it mildly, these are not good bedfellows.

Once again, we must remain cautious.
